## Most Meaningful Objective Report

# Learning Objective
The learning objectives of this project were to improve my skill with coding and to provide myself with additional experience in independent game development, by familiarizing myself with the design, production, and deployment processes of the industry in the form of this small project.

# Activities Performed

In the end, I would say that the most meaningful of these objectives was the increased familiarity with independent game development. Prior to this point, I had romanticized the idea quite a bit in my mind, as game development has been a career aspiration of mine for several years, even before I entered college. However, it appears I am getting ahead of myself. Before carrying that thought out further, I should explain exactly what activities I conducted over the course of this project that were related to the learning objective.

First, I began assembling a set of C++ tutorials, assuming they would be critical to the use of the Unreal Engine based on what I had heard about the engine, and began watching them. While they were generally useful, I would be quite surprised a short while after I downloaded the Unreal Engine. Before this surprise occurred, however, I began attempting to learn the engine through YouTube tutorials. This was a mistake, however, as they offered very little in the way of any real structure. Most of my choices were simply random “beginner tutorials” that I had difficulty following. I did not discover the far more structured tutorial articles posted by Epic Games itself, the developer of the Unreal Engine, until halfway through week two of the project. At this point, I began following the tutorial articles fairly closely, though in hindsight, not at the pace that I should have been. I created many small projects to follow along with the tutorials, and learned a great deal of useful information about the engine. However, as I kept proceeding through the tutorials, I eventually noticed that there was a full manual on the website as well. However, in my second major mistake, I chose not to begin examining this full manual, as the manual appeared quite daunting and it seemed I would not be able to work my way through it within the time constraints of the course and while still completing my assignments in my other courses on time.

After this point, I made my second mistake, choosing to begin developing the project without examining that manual in-depth or reevaluating the scope of the project based upon what I had learned from the tutorials. However, I was still able to accomplish more than I expected, managing to import new character models, add new geometry to the level, slightly modify the lighting, get animations to work on the player character model, design custom hitboxes for the character’s melee weapon, and even get that melee weapon to return damage points. However, there were a few major failures to counter the success, such as my inability to apply functional animations to enemies, design a working health system for both the player character and enemies, give the enemies attacks, or design enemy AI to make them a threat. As these difficulties mounted, the due date of the project also began to draw closer, and instead of choosing to trim the scale of the project down significantly all at once, so that I would have a better chance of completing it and a sort of “safety cushion”, I chose to trim it back incrementally, as the aforementioned difficulties kept appearing. Eventually, I was able to create a working version of the game, but this version barely resembles the original vision in anything other than genre and aesthetic.

# What I Learned
Despite the fairly negative tone of the previous paragraph, these activities actually taught me many lessons. Some were rather direct, such as the information I learned from the tutorials that was mentioned above, and some were quite indirect, simply serving as more practical lessons learned over the course of the project. The greatest lesson learned as a result of these activities  was about properly evaluating the scope of a project and being able to know when a project needs to be trimmed back. If I had learned this lesson earlier on in the project lifespan, the end project would have been far more refined than it is now. If I had done so, I may have even had time to repair the issues I encountered with the enemies. Another personal lesson I learned is simply to be less stubborn about issues encountered during the completion of a task, and to prioritize completing the tasks I already know how to complete, rather than hyperfocusing on the ones I do not. The large level could have been produced far earlier on in the development process and its production would not have been as much of a last-minute addition if I had not become fixated on making the melee combat system work for as long as I did. Level construction was a task I already understood after completing the tutorials, and I should have focused primarily on that task. That would have given me a better foundation to build more complicated mechanics upon. Instead, I did this process in reverse, attempting to solve the more complex mechanics first before establishing the basics of the side scroller. I also learned the far more obvious lessons that I should ensure I properly and fully understand something before beginning an undertaking like this project and that I should better evaluate how easily something can be completed within a given timeframe, even allowing for the possibility that it may not be feasible to complete it within that time frame. 

# Reflection on Learning Experience
Again, despite my somewhat negative tone about the project as a result of my own easily avoidable mistakes, I would still say that the learning experience itself was positive overall. First of all, I was finally afforded the opportunity to invest a fairly significant amount of time into the Unreal Engine, a game development engine that I have always been fascinated with. Second, I learned a few harsh realities about independent game development, and had a few misconceptions of mine utterly shattered that are now baffling to even believe I ever held. One such misconception was the idea that anyone could become experienced enough to develop a full-fledged game of the original planned scale for my project within three months, when starting with absolutely no experience. This idea was so ridiculously naive that I am unsure how it even developed.  

Third, and most importantly, I was taught a harsh reality about my own habits in regards to projects such as this one. To put it quite simply, I am overly stubborn and often prone to attempting to fix one complicated issue within a project before even building out the remainder of the project that surrounds that complicated issue, even when the project is much simpler. This results in a simple part of the project becoming the part of the project that imparts the most pressure and stress, as a result of leaving it until far too close to a deadline. These are lessons that I have needed to learn for a very long time, but this project is the first one to truly drive them home, as their consequences have been very easily apparent as a result of the time logs and the ability to compare my progress with that of my classmates. 

In addition to all of that, this project taught me the importance of actually recording one’s interactions with a project, so as to hold themselves to account should they get off schedule. In the past, I have frequently procrastinated on projects until the last possible moment and managed to complete them without an almost unreasonably short amount of time. This project showed me in no uncertain terms that I will not be able to do so forever, and that properly pacing myself and holding myself accountable to a consistent amount of progress is highly important.

In conclusion, I am very grateful for the lessons learned throughout this project, as they forced me to confront a few personal flaws that I had never had a strong reason to begin working on, utterly destroyed many misconceptions I had about the industry I plan to eventually seek employment in, and forced me to realize that pride has no place in practicality, meaning that I must be able to accept when I simply cannot accomplish something I initially planned. 


[Return to Homepage](https://tkfromthe90s.github.io/)
